---
layout: default
title: "It's music time, it's revolution time"
nav_order: 4
has_children: false
has_toc: false
year: 1999-2001
people: 
products: 
    - iPod
    - iMac
    - Mac OS 9
---
<link rel="stylesheet" href="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/custom.css">

## It's music time, it's revolution time
The reason Steve Jobs was called back to lead Apple in 1998 was actually simple. The company had lost its way. First product-wise, then financially. The last great year was the 1995 financial year, when the company made over $11 billion and earned $424 million, a sales growth of over 20% over the previous year. That was the last good news. 

In the same year Microsoft came out with the groundbreaking Windows 95, which sold great and was able to compete with the Macintosh, PC prices plummeted. Not only does Apple's sales fall dramatically, but above all it goes into loss. It loses $816 million in 1996, and over a billion dollars a year later, effectively wiping out most of the profits it made in the previous fifteen years of its existence. When Jobs returns to the helm in 1998, dramatic cuts deepen the decline in sales to just under $6 billion, about half of what it was in 1995, but Apple is already making a profit again - $309 million in 1998. Everything looks great, the new iMacs are selling well. 

The idyll lasts until 2001, when the scenario repeats itself. Sales plummet dramatically, the company falls into the red in its first fiscal quarter, losing $195 million. And here's the kicker: Apple's first fiscal quarter of fiscal 2001 corresponds to the end of the year, i.e., pre-Christmas sales, in which Apple simply exploded. 

The reason is simple: computer sales are stagnant again. The biggest blow is yet to come: Microsoft's new operating system, Windows XP, is due to arrive in the autumn of 2001. Everybody is gunning for it, PC sales are stagnant, users are delaying their investment in a new computer in anticipation of the changes XP will bring, Microsoft is planning the biggest advertising campaign in its history, magazines are full of excitement about the new operating system that will replace the six years of changes from Windows 95, 98, Me and 2000 with one compact, attractive and modern system that is supposed to surpass anything Apple has ever created. 

One of the causes was the Internet bubble that burst. This has translated into a depression in the 'digital' markets in general. Companies have magically stopped investing not only in acquisitions and purchases of new technologies, but also in development and marketing. Whereas in 2000 seventeen technology companies had their commercials during the most expensive time during the Super Bowl broadcast, in 2001, after the dotcom bubble burst, there were only three companies. And the companies' problems also hit freelancers, the hired creatives who represented the typical user base of Apple computers at the time. There were fewer jobs and therefore less willingness to buy new computers. 

It wasn't just Apple that was in trouble; as the Wall Street Journal noted, U.S. PC sales grew by just 6.4 percent in the last quarter of 2000, the lowest since Gartner began tracking PC sales in 1993. And while worldwide growth was projected at 17 percent, actual sales growth was only 10 percent. In addition, the market has proven to be highly volatile and erratic in its confidence in brands. While Dell grew 37%, HP grew 20%, Compaq fell 8.7% (which later resulted in HP buying it) and Gateway fell 7.1%. But that was nothing compared to Apple's results. Apple's computer sales fell 50% in the US and 40% worldwide. Analysts agree that Apple is currently succeeding in selling computers only to its own user base and is not gaining any new users. The company, analysts document, is unable to generate economies of scale when its market share does not exceed 3% - and it doesn't. It won't be able to do that as long as it builds on a processor line that is not used elsewhere in the industry. Which is something even Apple management realizes.
In addition, analysts judge that the PC market is nearing saturation. Sales are being driven more by Europe and Asia, not the US where Apple is strongest.      

At this time, it is also becoming definitively clear that the iMac has missed its target audience. There are several reasons for this. First of all, it's clear that Mac OS 9, introduced in October 1999, is not the hit it was supposed to be, as it still lacks memory protection and preemptive multitasking, something the Windows world had done better with by then. Apple unveiled the ninth version of its operating system under the slogan "The best Internet operating system ever", but this alludes to Windows' difficulties with the Internet at the time rather than its own excellence. The system now supports online updates and multiple users, improved search, and support for central password storage in the Keychain, but these are rather minor improvements from the user's point of view, and do not compensate for the difficulties of running multiple applications simultaneously. Moreover, the thesis that people will want to process video on their computer has not been borne out. Many users left their videos unedited, or entrusted them to semi-professional studios, mostly computer-equipped individuals, who turned the video of a wedding into a few watchable minutes embedded with simple subtitles. Even with iMovies, video production was not so easy and fun that it was satisfying to the user. Much more prevalent at the turn of the millennium was another fad: making music compilations on CD. What did a boy gift his girl with when he wanted to demonstrate his romantic spirit? He made her a compilation of romantic hits. In the car was a collection of songs and stories for children, and in the discman was the right motivational tunes for the gym, studying, walking the dog and many other activities where people got into the habit of removing themselves from the hum of the city with a personal music player. In addition, the transition from cassette tapes to CDs was at its peak at the time, the production of which was significantly easier and of higher quality with the right software and hardware, even in amateur conditions. Even in the Czech Republic, CD burning drives were below 10,000 CZK in 2000, and within two years they dropped well below 5,000 CZK and became generally widespread. 

The iMac, however, has a problem with the burner. Remember the dilemma of whether slot drives would be difficult to find at the level of the times? Well, that's exactly the difficulty that has arisen. It wasn't until February 2001 that Apple managed to launch the iMac with a burner drive, and not an overly fast one at that time. And it wasn't until January 2002 that Apple launched the new iMac G4, dubbed the Lamp, which, in addition to an LCD, a new processor, and other improvements, also featured a combination CD burner and DVD-ROM drive for the first time. Until then, users had to buy the burners from other companies, which they generally did not want to do.    

Two years behind the world of digital music will be hard for Apple to make up, and critics point out that it's almost impossible. 

In a January 2001 interview with investors, Steve Jobs admits no doubts when he explains the company's explosion in what is usually everyone's strongest period, the pre-Christmas market: *"Last quarter we ordered our own medicine and pulled all inventory from distribution for five and a half weeks. This year we're starting with a big bang, shipping our new PowerBook G4 in January, a new PowerMac G4 with a 733 MHz processor coming in February, and a new Mac OS X operating system in March."*

In fact, Jobs already admits at the company that it was an error in his estimation. The computers are selling poorly because the company is unable to ship them with a CD-burning drive and also because of the "megahertz gap" that is opening up between the PowerPC and Intel Pentium processors. Apple is simply not able to offer computers clocked at the same frequency as those supplied by Intel, and although Jobs tries to promote the thesis that PowerPC processors are much more powerful at the same clock frequency, this is something that is difficult to explain to users. At the time, Intel was shipping Pentium 4 processors clocked at over 1.4GHz, while Apple was just about to sell computers with PowerPC G4 processors clocked at barely half that frequency. The change won't be made overnight, it needs to be made slowly. At this time, the company is beginning to prepare for the transition to Intel processors. The new Mac OS X operating system, introduced in January 2000, is also compiled and tested on Intel processors as standard, though still not yet publicly available, but it will be another five years before Apple officially announces its transition plans. But what will the company do for those five years?

In that time, Jobs has revisited his older idea of the digital hub, the thesis that the computer will be the center of the digital home, connecting all devices and performing functions they can't. The computer was supposed to take them away, to make work easier where it made sense. At the time, for example, video cameras came with built-in software that allowed simple tricks, scenes and interlaced scenes to be created directly in the camera. However, the results were mostly dismal, the software was difficult to use, and the camera's miniature display did not allow for easy operation, let alone precise image adjustment. The iMac was supposed to take over all this, and the devices themselves could be simple, designed only for what they needed to be used for in the field. In 1998, Jobs was seriously thinking about Apple making a digital camera or camcorder. One that would be easy to use and for which the iMac would serve as a digital hub. 