---
layout: default
title: "First important component: USB (and also FireWire)"
nav_order: 3
has_children: true
has_toc: false
year: 1997
people: 
    - Jon Rubinstein
products: 
    - iPod
    - USB
    - FireWire
---
<link rel="stylesheet" href="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/custom.css">

## First important component: USB (and also FireWire)

The average user, the design team judged, would not want to disassemble the computer to make an upgrade. Rather, he'll appreciate that the computer will work without his greater inventiveness and connecting cables, right out of the box. That was the first assumption that led to the all-in-one model. But this assumption also led to the introduction of a new interface, unheard of in computers for ordinary users at the time: USB. The USB standard was very fresh, only in early 1996 did the final version 1.0 finally appear, which was finally usable and allowed transfer speeds of up to 12 Mbps, soon followed by version 1.1, the first version to be widely adopted and to be picked up by Apple. Apple decided to use the new interface to replace the existing mix of buses including SCSI or the company's ADB. And the iMac became the first computer to use USB, contributing very significantly to its boom, and benefiting from its boom. 

Why was the choice of USB a happy one? Previous interfaces used by Apple were typically proprietary (like ADB, the Apple Desktop Bus) or professional and expensive, like SCSI. Few companies made peripherals for Apple computers. By choosing an interface that would also be used in the future in the Windows and PC world, the possibility of interoperability grew significantly; all they had to do was write drivers. Moreover, users did not have to throw away existing peripherals when switching from one computer to another. But that was also one of the arguments against the USB option, as many Apple officials feared that the company would significantly reduce peripheral sales by actually opening itself up to the world. But Jobs had a simple answer to that: he drastically reduced the number of peripherals Apple was making. This too was part of a return to the company's roots. Crucially, a number of manufacturers agreed to introduce a plethora of USB peripherals by the time the new Apple computer came to market. So there were going to be plenty of peripherals, and that was important for the end computer. 

Along with trimming the excess interfaces, hardware division chief Jon Rubinstein, along with Jobs, hit upon the idea of dropping the floppy drive from the computer, an essential part of every computer at the time. But the three-and-a-half-inch floppy drives in use at the time had a standard capacity of 1.44MB, and that was already too small. The days of the first Macs, when you could run the operating system and the entire computer from floppy disks, were long gone. To give you an idea, the Windows 95 operating system came on thirteen 3.5-inch floppy disks, while its successor, Windows 98, was no longer commonly sold on floppy disks; it came on CDs, and only on special request could a set of eighty installation floppies be made. Software distribution via floppy disks was ringing the bell in the mid-1990s, both because of the increasing space requirements of software, the falling price of CD drives, and ultimately the easier way to produce installation CDs compared to floppy disks. Last but not least, CD installation was significantly more convenient for the user, eliminating the problem of a lost floppy disk from a large installation package.   

Although it was already clear in the second half of the 1990s that the floppy disk drive was of no great importance in modern computers, PC vendors, fearing user reactions, continually included it in their assemblies. If it was used, it was for transferring user files and documents, but here again there was no affordable alternative. It wasn't until 1996 that the prices of writable CD-R drives got below the magical $1000 mark, they were still expensive for ordinary users and the now popular USB memory modules were virtually non-existent at the time. But one floppy disk could hold three to five photos even from the not-so-high-quality digital cameras of the time, and was not suitable for transferring larger amounts of data. It is true that a number of alternative recording media such as IoMega's Zip were developed at the time, but the computer industry did not move towards their widespread use. It was understood that this was only a transitional technology until the price of CD writers dropped enough to become common, and CD readers were already a common part of computers at the time, so reading burned CDs was usually not a problem. 

Rubinstein and Jobs decided to make a radical cut and eliminate the floppy disk drive for good, which was symbolic. The Macintosh computer was actually the first computer to use the 3.5-inch floppy disk drive, and with it, the floppy disk drive was to disappear. The new iMac got a built-in 56 Kbps modem as standard instead of a floppy drive, and it was expected that users would transfer smaller files as they were used to, over the Internet. If they really needed the floppy drive, they could buy a USB version. The radical move was later criticised as too radical when the iMac was introduced, with many commentators and reviewers unable to accept that on the new iMac they would not be able to write their files to anything that they could transfer to another computer as a physical medium, but experience showed that users were indeed more likely to use the Internet for ordinary file transfers. To accommodate this method of file transfer, Apple later in 2000 introduced the iTools suite of utilities, which included, among other things, the iDisk network drive that allowed files accessible then from the Internet to be stored and shared from different computers. This set of services available over the Internet later morphed into .Mac (in response to Microsoft's .Net), then MobileMe, and finally iCloud, introduced in 2011. iDisk, also available for Mac OS 9, the predecessor to today's generation of Mac OS X, offered 20 MB of storage space, with up to 400 MB of space available for an additional fee at a cost of $1 per MB per year. 
Steve Jobs introduces the new iMac on May 6, 1998, at Flint Auditorium at De Anza Community Colleage in Cupertino, the same location where the original Macintosh was rebuilt. Corporate legend has it that the iMac received a rousing reception. Which was largely true, by all accounts it had very positive reviews, and even among fans there was a prevailing excitement that Apple had finally found it and Jobs was back. It sold 278,000 units in the first six weeks of its August launch, and 800,000 by the end of the year, making the iMac the fastest-selling computer in Apple's history. For the record, the first iMac is usually referred to by its colour as Bondi Blue, a name derived from the colour of the water at Sydney's popular Bondi Beach. 

Image: apple-imac-g3---bondi-blue
Image caption: the first iMac with a 233MHz PowerPC 750 G3 processor, 32MB RAM, 4GB HDD, drawer CD-ROM. First Mac with USB ports. Introduced May 6, 1998, discontinued January 5, 1999. Price from $1299. 

A number of other decisions would prove important in the design of the first iMac. The first is the CD-ROM drive used. The first version of the iMac G3 had to use a conventional slide-out CD-ROM drive, which Jobs hated. He longed for a slot-loading model, a model where the CD just slides cleanly into the slot. But this model was not available in sufficient quantity and reliability at the time, and the first iMac had to use a classic twenty-four-speed (tray-loading) CD-ROM drive, which Jobs almost couldn't stand when he saw the first complete prototype of the iMac with a slide-out drive, and he railed at his designers. But there was no turning back but to delay the launch of the iMac for many months or to use a slide-out drive. Exceptionally, Jobs relented, but made an excuse to have the next iMac come with a slotted drive as soon as possible. 
As soon as the slotted CD-ROM drive was available, Jobs insisted on using it, and so in January 1999, when the upgraded iMac G3, referred to by its color as Blueberry, was introduced, it was fitted with a slotted twenty-four-speed CD-ROM drive. In this case, Jobs clearly preferred appearance over function, having been warned by his engineers of the consequences of doing so. After all, slot drives will be slower to evolve, burners will be slower to come on line in the future, and Apple will not yet be able to afford to dictate terms at that time. At the time, Jobs judges that it won't be a problem, but as the future will show, it will be. And ultimately, more of a challenge that will force Apple to approach music in a completely different way. 

Another important decision will be the use of FireWire. True, the first models didn't have FireWire, it didn't first appear until October 1999 on models designated DV, for Digital Video, which were expected to be used by users for video work. These iMacs had a standard built-in DVD-ROM drive and a pair of FireWire ports with a transfer rate of a then-respectable 400 Mbps, while a pair of USB 1.1 ports with a maximum speed of 12 Mbps remained. Even this version cost $1299. Jobs imagined that people would want to use the new iMacs for editing their video. At the time, cameras were dropping dramatically in price, with digital cameras coming on the market at a price and capability accessible to amateurs. In 1999 Sony launched the Digital8, and a year later a whole plethora of digital cameras using the DV standard arrived. And one thing was true for all digital cameras: the FireWire port, sometimes referred to as IEEE1394 or Sony's iLink, had to be used to transfer data to a computer, and we won't go into the differences leading to the different designations. The important thing was that all the new cameras were FireWire-compatible, and Apple was the first and for a long time the only company to incorporate FireWire as a standard interface in its computers for general users. Expansion cards could be purchased for the PC at one-third to one-half the cost of the computer. Particularly in the more affluent US market, where penetration of amateur family video has traditionally been high, Jobs expected Apple to become the logical choice for households that wanted some way to process their video. The iMac DV series was intended to do just that, with better digital video support that included a better graphics card and even a VGA output in addition to DVD-ROM and FireWire. 

Third, Apple came up with the decision to develop the basic software package for the Mac in-house. The reason for this decision was pragmatic. When Jobs decided to focus on amateur video processing with the iMac in 1999, he asked Adobe to prepare a video editing toolkit for the Mac OS, but was rebuffed, one part of a future rift with Adobe that would lead to the collapse of Adobe's ambitions to break into mobile with Flash a decade later. Jobs felt touchingly justified; if it weren't for Apple, Adobe wouldn't be where it was with its software packages. But that didn't count, so Apple began preparing its own software package in 1999 to turn iMacs into a home digital hub. First and foremost, it was iMovie, apparently the first standalone software in a decade that Apple wrote all by itself. iMovie was created as a secret project within Apple that even most employees had no idea about. Jobs managed to create a "startup environment" within the company, which is where iMovie eventually came into being as a simple tool for amateur video editing. iMovie was intended to accompany, as an option to purchase, the more powerful editing software Final Cut Pro, which had been co-developed with Apple by Macromedia, then a major competitor of Adobe, but later acquired by Adobe in 2005. iMovie was on the market in October 1999 along with the iMac DV, and was later offered to other users as a free download. The success Apple had with iMovie prompted it to later continue developing its own core software for the Mac. For now, though, Jobs still believes that users want to process digital video and will buy iMacs because of it. 
But Jobs was wrong. Users didn't want to process digital video. 

## Chronology of iLife components
- iMovie - October 1999
- iTunes - January 2001
- iDVD - January 2001  
- iPhoto - January 2002  
- iLife Package - January 2003
- GarageBand - January 2004   
- iWeb - January 2006
